I am the Director of the Department of Leadership and Personal Effectiveness of the Moscow Business School.
I am a teacher and have 20 years of experience in business education.
I have been a manager for 10 years in consulting, investment and insurance companies.
Today we will look at the organizational behavior course,
which is a very important part of the course.
the topic of personality and psychological institutions.
Personality and psychological institutions are topics that have interested psychologists, philosophers, sociologists
and all people who are interested in the organization of the soul of a person for centuries.
That is why there are countless theories of the description of a person's personality and psychological institutions.
It is clear that within the framework of our video course,
we cannot cover all possible theories and approaches to studying a person.
Yes, there is no need for this.
Our task is to get acquainted with some approaches to studying a person's personality.
And the most important thing is how to apply knowledge about a person's personality and psychological institutions in business.
Thus, our main tasks that we will solve during the course of the course of personality and psychological institutions will be as follows.
We will get acquainted with the main types of personality theory.
We will also get acquainted with the concept of personality in the theories of Freud, Jung and Bern,
on the basis of which the typology of the personality Myers-Briggs was created.
We will also consider how the typology of the personality of MBTI is applied today in the organization.
We will also consider the self-perception of feedback and the window of Johari, which is well known in business.
First, let's define what a personality is.
A personality is a combination of stable physical and psychological characteristics that allow an individual to identify himself in society.
Chiadaev said quite correctly at one time that without the opportunity to communicate with people,
we would simply pinch the grass and not think about the subtleties of a person's mental structure.
After all, a person's personality affects society in the same way as society affects a person's personality.
We can talk about a person's personality and psychological institutions only by looking at them in the socium.
The main types of personality theory presented on this slide give you a description of three approaches.
Psychodynamic theories explain the dynamics of a personality based on the interaction of structural elements of the psyche,
unconscious attractions, fears and complexes.
The followers of the psychodynamic theory of personality study were, for example, Freud and Jung.
Sociodynamic theories.
The leading role in the development of the psyche is given to the social conditions of the existence of a personality and its social environment.
And, accordingly, interactionist theories, where the psychosomatic structure of a person's personality and the socium in which a person is located affect the dynamics of a personality.
Psychodynamic theories.
Today we will look at the main approach of psychodynamic theories, as I said, the followers of which were Freud and Jung.
So, the classical psychoanalysis of Freud.
The classical psychoanalysis of Freud can be represented as an iceberg.
As Freud said, the area of the conscious is the top of the iceberg of the human soul, and the area of the unconscious is what is hidden under water.
It is 80% of the mental processes that control the life and actions of a person.
So, what is the personality of a person in Freud's theory?
Or, if we visualize it, as you can see on the slide, in the image of an iceberg hidden under water.
So, what is the area of the conscious?
This is the open part of the iceberg, these are the mental actions and processes that a person realizes, which he controls.
According to Freud, the super-I, the area of the conscious, is influenced by society.
The super-I is the control over the criteria of assessment of good, bad, good and evil.
However, according to Freud's ideas about the personality of a person, this is only 20% of the motivation of a person's actions.
As I said, the rest of the 80% is hidden in the area of the unconscious.
What is the area of the unconscious in Freud's teachings?
So, the I, or as Freud says, is all the attractions, passions, suppressed thoughts, feelings, fears.
This is the so-called pot of passions, where the main impulses boil, which a person inherits, which he is given from birth, which, unfortunately or fortunately, cannot be changed according to the theory of classical psychoanalysis.
At the same time, they control our lives by 80%.
So, the pot of passions is the area of our unconscious, it is what Freud calls it.
These are our attractions, fears, suppressed thoughts, feelings and complexes.
It is this number of passions and impulses, according to the theory of classical psychoanalysis, that controls the motivation of a person's actions, the behavior of a person by 80%.
Between the I, the pot of passions, and the area of the conscious super-I, which I just told you about, there is the so-called mediator, the censor, or, as Freud designated it in his classical psychoanalysis, the I.
This is an internal censor, which is also not subject to the control of a person, but nevertheless it controls these unconscious impulses, unconscious attractions, unconscious passions before they enter the area of the conscious and get involved in words, actions and actions.
Therefore, according to Freud's theory, the life of a person or the psyche of a person is a constant struggle, a constant interaction between it, passions and desires, and the I, the internal censor.
The most important thing is that a person cannot influence their interaction by means of desires and by means of control. Therefore, this energy that a person receives to perform his actions is exactly in the process of an internal conflict between it, desires and passions, and between the unconscious I, the control.
Thus, a person receives energy in the process of constant interaction, or, as he says, struggle between impulses, it, and between the I, the censor, the control of these desires.
Thus, according to Freud's classical psychoanalysis, a person is controlled by the actions of a person, 80% of it is controlled by his subconscious, and only 20% is taken away from the area of the conscious I, and that which is formed in the process of social influence and divides all actions into good and bad.
Freud came to this theory in the process of many years of practical psychotherapeutic practices. However, the strongest influence on the formation of the essence of classical psychoanalysis of Freud was played by the works of Nietzsche, Schopenhauer and Gardner, philosophers, whose works Freud was particularly involved in in recent years.
If we talk about the followers and disciples of Freud, of course, we remember Carl Gustav Jung, a famous Swiss psychotherapist, who in some way repeated Freud's theory of the structure of Personality and at the same time brought his researches and new discoveries to the structure of Personality, which, at one time, let's say, even pleased humanity.
Because if Freud argued that a person is not subject to his reactions and actions, Jung introduced a completely new concept, the so-called self, which is intended to control all these conscious and unconscious parts of Personality that are in a person.
So, what does the structure of Personality look like according to Jung? Well, almost the same. There is a deeply unconscious, so-called shadow, there is a mediator, the so-called mask, there is a conscious I, or I, as Jung said, and, accordingly, there is also the image of a man and a woman, anima and amus.
That is, Jung called this part of the theory of the structure of Personality. So, all these four structures that you see on the diagram are intended to control the self, that is, the higher conscious part of Personality, which is a mediator and has the ability to interfere in the negotiation processes of impulses and control, which Freud could not do.
At the same time, Jung introduced another interesting element into the theory of the structure of Personality, the so-called conscience or collective unconscious.
Here he gives an interesting example in his works. Once a businessman came to him for a consultation and told him about his recent dream. He was preparing for a very important financial deal and in a dream he saw his hands and shoulders dirty with dirt.
He came to Jung for a consultation, what to do to him. Of course, Jung said, interrupt the deal. Based on this dream, Jung draws a certain conclusion that ethical norms or the so-called conscience of a person is an uneducational moment, it is deeply embedded in a person's subconscious and is inherited.
This is reflected, for example, in such mental processes as sleep.
Now we will consider another theory of the structure of Personality, the so-called Bern Transact Analysis. Why exactly the Bern Transact Analysis, along with the classical theory of psychoanalysis of Freud or Jung's analytical theory?
In order to study the structure of Personality in detail according to Freud and Jung, you need to go very deeply and seriously into the field of psychology. In business, there is no need for managers who are not engaged in psychology to study the structure of Personality in such depth and detail.
Therefore, one of the most successful theories of the structure of Personality, which is applicable in business, which is very easy to apply to the person's idea of ​​himself and other people, which is very effective in the use of coaches in any training of personal growth, sales, interpersonal communication, customer service and management skills.
It is a very clear, simple and accessible theory of the Bern Transact Analysis, which, in fact, is very close and very effectively repeats the theory of psychoanalysis of Freud and Jung.
So, what does the structure of Personality look like according to the Bern Transact Analysis?
The structure of Personality is the same as in childhood up to the age of 3 years. And, as Eric Bern claims, it never changes. That is, all these psychological and mental patterns of behavior, all these installations and reactions that we have learned in childhood up to the age of 3 years live with us and accompany us all our life.
So, if I ask you a question, how does a child behave most often when he encounters an annoying external environment factor? You will answer me, crying, capricious or silent, going into himself.
That's how we learned to react in childhood to the annoying external environment factor. That's how we grow up and become adults, we carry these behavioral patterns all our life. This is our unconscious, this is the lower part of the iceberg, according to the theory of psychoanalysis of Sigmund Freud.
This is the second part of Personality, which Eric Bern calls the parent. If we follow Freud's psychoanalysis theory, this is the I that constantly controls and conducts strict censorship between the impulses and desires of a child, or as Freud calls it, it.
So, according to Freud, a child, according to Bern, according to Freud, is it, a parent is me, according to Freud. Who is a parent? How do patterns or behavioral patterns of a parent appear most often? Bad is good, good is bad, black is white, good is evil. That is, a parent is categorical in their assessments, he is always right.
This part of Personality that a person, each of us, got, was inherited from those people who influenced us when we were little.
These are not necessarily only mothers and fathers, but also teachers, teachers, older brothers and sisters, neighbors, friends, in the yard or in the school, in the kindergarten, but it is those people who had, influenced us in childhood.
These behavioral patterns we learn from adults, and they live with us and become a part of our personality. In other words, if a child was brought up very strictly in childhood, there were very strict parents, then there is a possibility that the child will grow up and repeat the pattern of parental behavior.
He will be as strict and categorical in his attitude to other people.
So, these two parts of our personality are our unconscious, this is the lower part of the iceberg, which we examined in Freud's theory of psychoanalysis.
And another personality, our conscious, or as Eric Bern calls it, our adult.
This is the part of Personality that is devoid of individuality and emotions, this is our consciousness, this is our conscience, as Jung says in his teachings.
This is the part of our personality that we control because we are well aware of it.
So, our unconscious controls our actions. This is our childhood, which we were brought up with, which is brought up in us at the age of about 3 years.
And this is our parental part, which is passed on to us by inheritance, that is, we learn certain behavioral patterns from those people who at one time had a certain influence on us.
So, according to Eric Bern, this is how the structure of a person's personality looks like.
Let's discuss whether it is good or bad to have a capricious child or a very strict parent in your personality.
If I ask you a question, please tell me, have you ever been offended, have you ever cried, have you ever been capricious?
Of course, if you answer no, it will be from a sly person. Of course, yes.
This is a part of Personality that is necessarily in each of us, to a greater or lesser extent.
It manifests itself, as a rule, in stressful and critical situations.
In this part of Personality, the creativity of a person is hidden, the potential of his creativity.
Here is his individuality and self-expression.
Why does too oppressive upbringing deprive a person of his individuality in the process of his growth?
Because a person inherits the instillation of his parents, and when he grows up, he does not live his own life, but inherits the instillation of parental influence.
Another question is how a person with a pronounced childlike part can manifest itself in society.
If we draw it symbolically, here is such a childlike part, and the other two are small, the childlike part is very large.
We call them so-called great-old children, who are to a lesser extent deprived of control of this censorship, and behave not as society would like.
As a rule, these are very talented and extraordinary people who are engaged in art and creativity.
Thus, Eric Bern, to summarize, states that a child and a parent are unconscious in a person, who control the actions and motivations of a person by 80%.
It is impossible to change these two parts of a person, but, as Eric Bern and other psychologists claim, this can be learned to manage and can be learned to live with it organically.
But it is impossible to change it.
How can we use the knowledge of the psychology of a person's personality in business?
How can we influence people's behavior or understand the motivation of employees' actions?
At one time, incredibly talented Americans, Katerina Briggs and Isabella Myers, a mother and a daughter, used the discovery of Carl Gustav Jung very effectively,
which had been lying on the shelves for more than 40 years, because it was considered very difficult to access and not quite understandable to the ordinary person to study the type of personality.
Katerina Briggs and Isabella Myers studied Jung's works very carefully and conducted observations and studies of the behavior of people, different people, in the same situations.
They came to the conclusion that different people in the same situations behave differently. Moreover, certain types of personality in certain situations behave in a completely predictable way.
Thus, during the Great Patriotic War, which accelerated the creation of the typology of personality, Katerina Briggs and Isabella Myers observed the behavior of people in non-standard situations, in military conditions, when people had to perform functions that were not their own.
Thus, already in 1980, Katerina Briggs and Isabella Myers created the most interesting and today considered the most popular survey tool for the typology of personality, which is called MBTI.
What is this survey tool, what is its basis, what characteristics of personality types are included in this survey tool, and how to determine each type of personality of each person and, in fact, for what.
Katerina Briggs and Isabella Myers give a very clear answer that the knowledge of the typology of personality in business will help to manage people in the most effective way, knowing their strengths and using them for effective work and concentrating on the strengths,
since each person has more powerful and less powerful sides of nature.
So, the typology of personality and 8 main characteristics of personality types are represented by pairs.
According to Myers-Briggs, the type of a person is represented in 4 formats.
The first of them is the source of energy, from where a person draws energy in life.
Extrovert, introvert. We will consider each type sequentially and separately, now all 4 at once.
The second is the center of human attention and the way of obtaining information from the environment.
It turns out that different people get different information from the outside world.
The third characteristic is the way of making decisions.
According to Jung, Freud and the statement of Myers-Briggs, people make decisions in different ways.
Some people make logical decisions, others make heart-shaped decisions.
And the last characteristic is the lifestyle of an individual.
So, let's consider each characteristic separately and see how it can be applied in business, in work, in the formation of working groups and working teams.
So, extrovert and introvert. As I said, this is a characteristic that determines the source of energy, from where a person draws energy to perform certain tasks.
So, extrovert is the outside world, tasks, objects.
In other words, this is a person who needs to interact with someone all the time and communicate all the time.
And this is his way of survival, because it is in communication with other people, in the process of exchanging information, that he receives energy, a push for development.
And introvert is a person who loves solitude, feelings and reflection.
This is a person who receives energy in solitude, feelings and reflection.
Probably, each of you has now thought about yourself.
Where is it more comfortable for him to be? Most often in constant communication and interaction with other people, or still in reflections, solitude and feelings?
Well, I will give you two simple examples so that you can understand who is an extrovert and who is an introvert.
An extrovert is a consultant, a seller in a store.
A visitor comes to him and asks a completely strange question.
Tell me, please, can I buy half a bunch of parsley?
To which the seller, the consultant, I note, the extrovert, goes for advice to his manager.
He goes to the manager, followed by the buyer, although the consultant does not see this.
The consultant approaches the manager and asks, Boss, just some weirdo came and asks, can I buy half a bunch of parsley?
Accidentally turns around and sees a buyer standing next to him, to which he immediately reacts and notes,
but this nice person agreed to buy a second bunch of parsley.
That is, this is a person who is in constant communication and contact, and, they say, he will not go out of his way.
Or the second example is an introvert.
A teacher ties shoes to a boy in a kindergarten.
She puts them on his feet for a long time, then she ties them up for a long time.
At the end, when she ties the last bow, the boy says, these are my brother's shoes.
To which the teacher gently unties his shoelaces, unties the shoes, carefully removes the shoes.
And in the end, the boy says the following phrase, but my mother has already allowed me to wear them, because my brother grew up from them.
Yes, an introvert, who needs to concentrate and get ready a lot in order to say the following phrase.
You can now understand that if you have an extrovert in your department, in the department, in the organization,
and your subordinate, your employee, an extrovert is next to you,
if you make an extrovert do reports and routine monotonous work for a week,
he will not survive for a long time in your group, just because he will lose energy, he will run out of energy.
This is not him.
Or vice versa. This often happens when an introvert is sent to a presentation.
After the second or third presentation, for some reason, it is strange, the person writes a statement and leaves,
because he does not receive energy there, he loses it there.
What is the effectiveness?
The clearer we determine whether a person is an extrovert or an introvert,
the more effectively we can use his strong sides in the process of performing work tasks.
So, the next feature is the center of attention and the way of obtaining or collecting information.
There are two categories of people who receive information thanks to five senses,
they collect information in the present, what is next to them, or in the past.
This is a sensory type.
And there is an intuitive type.
This is a person who collects information, sees the task and sees the end point.
These are people who are able to see the whole picture on top, unlike sensory people,
who can make a mosaic, step by step, step by step.
For example, two sensory and intuitive thieves climb to the 13th floor to rob an apartment.
Suddenly, a figure moves towards them.
The intuitive says, let's jump faster.
What does the sensory answer?
Wait, the 13th floor, I managed to count quickly, sensory.
What does the intuitive answer?
You know, now is not the time for superstition, jump.
So, the next feature of a person according to the typology of the personality MBTI is a way of making decisions.
As Myers-Briggs claims, people are divided into two categories according to the way of making decisions.
There are also two categories, the thinking ones, who make decisions based on logic and the concept of right or wrong.
And the sensory ones, who make decisions based on personal values.
As an example, the thinking ones.
Two brothers, one of them goes on a long trip and leaves his dog with his younger brother Jim.
A few days later, the brother calls from the trip and asks, Jim, how is my dog?
To which the thinking Jim replies, your dog is dead.
How is it dead? You could not prepare me for a few days, you should have said on the first day that the dog was not feeling well.
The next day I would call you, you would say that she was getting a little worse.
And only on the third day, when I would be morally ready for this, you would tell me that the dog was dead.
By the way, how is my mother doing? Your mother is feeling very bad, says the thinking brother Jim.
So, the sensory ones.
The person swallowed a glass eye, walked for a long time, then finally he had a stomachache, he decided to turn to the doctor.
When he came to the doctor and reported that he had a stomachache, the doctor began to examine the patient from behind.
He saw an eye there, to which he said the following phrase, the sensory one, F, to the patient, if you do not trust me, I will not be able to cure you.
Thus, you also have employees in your department who are related to the type of thinking, who make decisions based on logic, whether it is correct or not,
and to the type of the sensory, the feeling, who make decisions based on their personal inner values.
And the last characteristic of the personality type, according to the typology of BTI, is the lifestyle, it is the judgment of J and the perception of P.
People of J, as Myers-Briggs calls them, live in an orderly and predictable world.
People of P live in a deep, spontaneous world, where the options of choice and decision are open, and, by the way, decisions are not made until the very last moment.
Well, if we draw two parallel characteristics, for example, how J is going to buy a car, and how P is going to buy a car,
J will plan for a very long time in which garage he will put his car, if he has a garage, he will definitely put it in order in time,
if he does not have a garage, he will definitely choose a place where he will put it for a long time, if it is possible.
Only after that he will buy a car. P, unlike J, makes a decision at the very last moment, first he will buy a car, and then he will choose a place or clean the garage.
Or, for example, parents call J, a person who lives by the judgments in a predictable world.
I missed you, would you like to come to visit me? What will J do?
First, he will check his timetable, his schedule, he will go for a while, take tickets, every day he will wake up and check whether the day of departure has come to his parents.
What will P do if he makes a decision now, he will go to the station now, he will buy a ticket, and only then he will understand that he cannot go to his parents tomorrow or the day after tomorrow,
because it turns out that he has a schedule and he is going to return this ticket.
So, J is a predictable world, P is an impulse and a momentary decision.
Based on these four criteria, there are several temperaments.
In other words, Myers-Briggs highlights four main temperaments, which to some extent affect the development and business.
So, one is the NF temperament. As you understand, each temperament, if you pay attention to the table, consists of four defining letters.
Remember, the first is the method from which energy is drawn, the second letter indicates the method of searching and gathering information, the third is the method of making decisions, and the fourth is the lifestyle.
So, the NF temperament is people who always see the prospects.
These are very deeply sensitive people, personal qualities of others are always important to them.
They can notice the best in other people, they can inspire others to achieve their goals.
These are leaders. As you remember, N is sensitive and intuitive people.
Let's consider each temperament in the same situation.
The NF temperament is a person who is driving on the road and sees the speed limit.
Please slow down to 30 km per hour, fasten your seat belt, otherwise you will be fined.
Of course, the NF temperament is a person who will tell you if you do not fasten your seat belt next to him.
Please fasten your seat belt, I do not want to lose you, I will worry about you.
These are people who talk most often about feelings and attitude to others.
So, the next temperament is the NT temperament.
These are people who can collect information on a large scale, while making decisions using logic.
N is large-scale perspectives, T is logical thinking.
These are people of strategy, people who see the prospects.
They are very ambitious and have no authorities except themselves.
Because they are guided by their own standards and always put the authorities and sources offered to them in doubt.
These are people who are very good at strategic projects.
They are very enthusiastic and take risks.
What will the NT say if you do not fasten your seat belt next to him?
He will support you.
He will say that this is a violation of human rights, this is a pressure on my freedom.
In general, I decide whether I should fasten my seat belt or not.
I decide whether I am ready to pay a fine or not.
This is a person who puts all the authorities in doubt.
The next temperament is S temperament.
As you remember, S is a sensitive person who makes logical decisions and lives by the standards set by the so-called SJ.
These are very practical, very organized, very structured employees and people in general.
They obey the rules and order.
Of course, you can guess without me and answer the question how SJ will react if you do not fasten your seat belt next to him.
He will definitely tell you to fasten your seat belt.
This is the law.
Because these are people who know how to establish laws themselves and know how to follow these laws very clearly.
They know how to organize others to comply with these laws.
And the last temperament is a rather rare temperament.
This is S temperament.
This is a person who can collect information using five senses.
Remember, S is a sensitive person and at the same time very impulsive and makes quick decisions.
Therefore, they are called so-called crisis managers because they act very effectively in the conditions of crises and conflicts.
What will the SP temperament say if you do not fasten your seat belt next to him?
This is a risk environment for him, this is his environment.
Therefore, he will say, yes, it will be funny to fly at a speed of more than 30 km per hour to the window with a seat belt on.
So, according to the typology of the personality MBTI, you can now see such an unusual picture, which consists of 16 types of personality,
each of which, each temperament that we have just described, is marked in a certain color.
In vertical, temperament NF is leaders who feel and inspire.
This is NT, green color, these are strategists who see the prospects, know how to generate ideas and interesting projects.
This is the blue color of temperament SJ, these are people who are very organized and very good at organizing others to work.
And, accordingly, so-called risk managers are people who work effectively in the conditions of crises and conflicts.
This large table is divided into two parts because the two lower lines are extroverts, the two upper lines are introverts.
Temperament is the same.
Thus, if we are talking about creating an effective team and within the framework of organizational behavior,
it is simply necessary to know the structure of the personality and take into account the typology of the personality, according to Myers-Briggs.
Why?
Now I will give you an example from a real business, in which the research of the top managers team was carried out on the percentage of temperaments that exist in it.
And what was revealed?
So, people who are able to generate a large number of ideas and see on a large scale, this is a green salad column, temperament NT,
there were 39% of such people in the company at the top managers level.
This is a fairly high percentage.
Pay attention to people who could execute and implement ideas.
These are good, responsible executors, they are marked in blue in the gray line, SJ, 46%.
Pay attention, approximately equal number of those who create ideas and equal number of those who can implement these ideas.
At the same time, the company experienced incredibly large problems in that it suffered from these mega-projects.
That is, there were a lot of people who generated interesting ideas and a very large number of top managers who could pick up ideas and start to prescribe them at the business process level.
Look at what an interesting phenomenon.
It seems that there are enough people who can generate ideas and there is no shortage of ideas.
At the same time, there are people who are able to implement ideas at the business process level, to describe their implementation process.
However, all ideas, for some strange reason, died at the second step of implementation.
The company could not pick them up, not financially, but simply could not pick them up for some reason.
They died at the level of the executors, the same operators, the same operators who directly communicate with the clients.
The reason is the following.
The readiness to disclose the best qualities and persuasiveness in people is the NF temperament.
Pay attention, the team has only 10%.
That is, there are ideas, there are executors.
A large shortage of people who could convey these ideas, inspire and convince the ordinary employees of new projects.
Therefore, in this company, according to the results of the research using the typology of the personality of the MBTI,
an offer was made to include several people with the NF temperament in the top managers.
That is, leaders who could convey ideas to ordinary executors.
Accordingly, the situation leveled out in six months, because there were these stakeholders,
who could very effectively convey ideas and changes to the lowest levels of the company employees.
Thus, dear listeners, knowing the typology of the personality of the MBTI,
you can learn to effectively build a team and manage the efficiency of the work of this team.
For example, the task of generating ideas, developing some strategic plans.
Of course, you will assign people who are related to the temperament of the NT, the strategists.
This is the meaning of their work, and in this place they will be the most effective.
But if you assign them to create some reports or describe business processes,
you may not always get an effective result,
because the temperament of these people is their less powerful side, monotonous and non-creative work.
Of course, you will assign monotonous and non-creative work to the temperament of the SJ.
These are sensitive, consistent and predictable people,
who, if you say that the report should be on the table tomorrow at 9 am,
you can sleep peacefully, because this report will be on your table at 9 am.
If you need to introduce a person to the team,
who can build interpersonal communication between all the team members,
of course, remember that it is necessary to concentrate the search on the temperament of the NF,
on people who can build interpersonal communication and inspire other people.
However, if you assign them to monotonous and sensitive work,
related to weekly reports and creating routine and consistent actions,
you will not get results from such people, not because they do not know how to do it or do not want to do it,
but because the personality and determination of these people are completely different.
It is clear that when you have crisis situations in the group,
of course, the most effective way to use the temperament of the SP is to get out of the window with unbuttoned belts.
It's funny, because these are the elements of a crisis situation.
If you assign the temperament of the SP to monotonous and routine work,
or to build interpersonal communication, you can only think that they can spoil everything.
Therefore, knowing the typology of the personality Myers-Briggs or MPTI, as it is called in the world,
you can very effectively build a team and manage organizational behavior,
knowing the stronger and less strong sides of your employees.
Personality and self-perception
So, now we will get acquainted with the concept of self-perception and feedback,
and what psychological institutions are at the heart of the perception of one individual over another.
So, what is personal perception?
Personal perception is the obtaining and processing of information about one subject over another.
As an object and a subject of information, both individual and a group of people can act.
However, the complexity of the process of perception is that the ability of a person to process information is not limitless.
When forming the image of a partner, a person encounters a certain amount of fragmentary information,
that is, with pieces of information, and evaluates them taking into account personal psychological and emotional institutions.
The entire restlessness of information in these fragments is built up by a person based on his personal subjective experience.
Thus, information distortion occurs.
Now I will demonstrate to you what the distortion of information looks like on a small game.
Please get ready.
Prepare a sheet of paper and a pen.
I have a drawing on a flip chart that consists of geometric figures.
This is a complete drawing, a semantic drawing, consisting of geometric figures.
You do not see this drawing.
I will describe to you how the drawing on my flip chart looks in parts.
At the same time, I have a clear establishment that I cannot use any geometric terms in the process of describing my drawing.
Otherwise, I will use associations associated with these geometric terms.
For example, if I need to say that this is a circle, then instead of the word circle I will use an apple.
Or if I need to say that this is a rectangle, then instead of a rectangle I will use the term table top view.
Clear?
Thus, I will also play the role of one of the participants in the game
and I will demonstrate to you how he sees the information I provide and how it goes through the stages of distortion.
So, attention.
Please draw the lower part of the woman's dress in the middle of the sheet.
Now please draw an inverted iron without a handle over the upper part of the figure that you have depicted.
After you have drawn an inverted iron without a handle,
from the middle of it up, please draw a pencil.
On the right of the pencil, please draw a figure that looks like a bag of milk.
The game is over.
Now please compare your drawings, the drawings of the imaginary participant in the game,
with the original drawing that I tried to convey to you without using any geometric terms.
In other words, I tried to convey some parts of the information to you not just in a hidden way, but in a figurative way.
So, the original drawing looked like this.
The lower part of the woman's dress,
an inverted iron without a handle,
a pencil in the middle and up,
a bag of milk on the right,
which was used in the Soviet era.
Thus, a psychological phenomenon called openness is of great importance for mutual understanding.
What is openness?
Openness is a psychological phenomenon that depends on the level of awareness of one's inner self
and self-perception at the personal level.
It should be remembered that an inadequate idea of ​​one's own self creates many psychological barriers to communication.
But the conditions for forming an adequate idea of ​​one's own personality
are its perception and analysis of one's behavior from the point of view of others.
The process of receiving feedback in interaction,
based on which the image of one's own self is formed,
can be demonstrated on the model created by Joseph Loft and Harry Ingham,
which is now called the Johari window in psychology and sociology.
What is the Johari window and what does it look like?
The Johari window consists of four squares,
each of which represents a definition of a person's awareness in society and awareness of a person himself.
Please pay attention to the slide.
There are two lines in the Johari window, horizontal and vertical.
In this case, the vertical line divides the Johari window into two parts, the right and the left.
The left part, the blue one on your slide,
is all the information that a person knows about himself,
that is, his open zone and his hidden zone.
But the orange part, the right part,
is all the information that a person does not know about himself,
that is, his blind zone and his unknown zone.
Also, along the horizontal line,
only here we have the lower part of the Johari window and the upper part of the Johari window.
The lower part of the window represents the information
that a person does not know about himself, society or group,
that is, his hidden zone and unknown zone.
And, accordingly, the upper part along the horizontal line
is the information that a group knows about a person,
that is, his open zone and his blind zone.
Thus, let's consider each zone separately.
So, zone number one is open.
This is information about an individual, about a person,
known to him or herself and to others.
It is quite clear that the larger the open zone,
the more trust relationships are established.
Zone number two is the so-called blind zone.
This is information about a person, which is known to other people,
but unknown to him or herself.
That is, it is the opinion of others about a Personality.
Here is the following situation.
If the opinion of others about me coincides with my idea of ​​myself,
I have good and normal relations with these people or with a group of these people.
If the opinion of others does not coincide with my idea of ​​myself,
but is somewhat subdued,
there are likely conflicts and, in general,
there are likely to be no relations at all.
If the opinion of others is somewhat subdued with my own assessment of myself,
I perceive it as a leap.
It should be noted that everything related to the blind zone
can become a manipulation of an open person's consciousness.
That is, a subdued assessment is a manipulation,
and, accordingly, a deliberately subdued assessment of a person's actions
is also a deliberate manipulation of another person's consciousness.
The next zone is the hidden zone.
This is information about a person, known to him or herself,
but hidden from the group for various reasons.
The reasons can be different,
it is just not possible to demonstrate one's knowledge,
skills, skills, behavior patterns, behavior manners,
or for some specific reason a person was even given the opportunity,
but he did not want to demonstrate it.
If in the previous case the so-called blind zone
in order to get feedback,
you need to ask more questions and ask,
listen to the opinion of others,
then in order to develop your hidden zone,
you need to talk more,
talk about yourself, demonstrate your qualities, skills, and skills without hesitation.
And, accordingly, the fourth sector is the unknown zone.
Otherwise, we say that this is our unconscious part,
our Personality, which is not known to us,
is not visible, is invisible to others.
And this part of our Personality or our psychological institutions
is manifested only in stressful and extreme situations.
Sometimes, as the research of psychologists shows,
this zone in a person never appears throughout his life.
Accordingly, each square in the window of the jahari
at different times and in different situations
has a different size.
It is quite clear that at the stage of establishing contacts,
at the stage of establishing relationships,
we will have a very small, small open zone,
accordingly, the unknown zone, the blind and the hidden will be quite large.
However, in the process of interaction,
in the process of communication, in the process of life and interaction in a group,
we receive feedback from the group,
we provide information about ourselves to the group,
and, accordingly, our open zone becomes larger.
Thus, if a person is closed from others,
he begins to realize himself worse.
And, on the contrary, when a person behaves openly,
others can learn more about him,
and, consequently, he will receive more feedback.
And this increases the possibility of mutual understanding in a group
or in a pair of personal contact.
The problem of perception is well-developed in social psychology.
The term social perception
was first introduced by the American psychologist Bruner.
He conducted numerous experiments,
thanks to which he established that it turns out
that our personal perception is influenced not only by our personal psychological and emotional institutions,
but also by sociocultural factors.
For example, it was proposed to children from poor families to determine the size of coins.
And it turned out that children from poor families
somewhat exceeded the size of a real coin.
And, on the contrary, children from rich families
imagined the size of a coin a little smaller than it is in real life.
Or, for example, the same deformation in the studies on the growth,
on the perception of human growth.
A group of students was proposed to assess the growth of certain people.
At the same time, each person was assigned his social status
as a lab assistant, teacher, teacher, professor.
It turned out that the higher the social status of a person,
the higher his growth was perceived by a group of students.
Thus, I emphasize, Bruner introduced such a concept as sociocultural factors.
That is, not only our psychological and emotional institutions,
everything related to the type of personality,
remember, the theory of personality of Freud, Jung, Bern,
what we have already studied, but also sociocultural factors.
The psychological mechanisms of perception in intergroup communication
are related to the process of so-called social stereotyping.
The essence of this is that the perception of a certain person's image
is based on certain type schemes.
I will give you a simple example.
For 10 years I have been teaching at various universities.
And students come to my first course.
Here is a very noticeable effect of social stereotyping.
Let's take students of recent years.
Because social stereotyping differs from students of 5, 7 and 10 years ago.
It turns out that a student who wears a certain brand of certain clothes,
Prada, Gucci, Chanel, Versace, drives a certain brand of a car,
is perceived by the group as more successful,
more intelligent and more intellectually developed student.
All other students, who, according to their intellectual characteristics,
may outperform those above, are not perceived by the group.
Everything is equated to the second and third courses,
when people enter into closer relations,
and when the effect of the initial perception,
that is, the attitude of a person to a certain group
due to social stereotyping, ceases to work,
then, accordingly, other characteristics come to the forefront,
and, accordingly, other students become smarter, more intellectual.
However, the important characteristics,
those that allow to attribute a partner or a person to a certain group,
are quite precise.
That is, in terms of how a person dresses,
what manner of behavior he has, how he talks,
we, in the initial perception, attribute him to a certain group.
This is true.
However, the mistake is different.
We refine the other features of the personality,
the intellect of this person,
and here we make a mistake,
because we can overestimate the personality of a person,
or vice versa,
by some certain factors that he does not have,
we can underestimate him.
Thus, these initial perception mistakes are due to three main factors.
These are superiority, attractiveness, and attitude to us.
So, the perception scheme is as follows.
Each of us has important criteria for us,
and information about superiority is usually
embedded in clothes and manner of behavior.
For example, I have a certain inner criterion,
I have a car of a certain class, of a certain value,
and my inner criterion is that a person who drives the same car as me is successful,
and if he drives a car of a higher class and more expensive,
he is even more successful.
Therefore, all people who fall into my field of view,
who drive other cars of a higher class and more expensive,
I tend to overestimate them.
It seems to me that they are smarter, better, stronger, and more successful.
However, if a person falls into my field of view,
who has a car of a lower class, or does not have a car at all,
I tend to underestimate him.
It seems to me that he is less successful, less intelligent, less interesting.
I repeat, this is a perception error.
There are certain social stereotypes that we attribute to the class,
while we underestimate or overestimate other deeper personal characteristics.
Now let's see how the attractiveness factor works in life.
The attractiveness factor is, as noted in psychology,
a beautiful, I quote, and ugly appearance.
It is that we also, focusing on the beautiful and ugly appearance of a person,
we tend to overestimate or underestimate his personal characteristics.
Once there was an interesting experiment.
Teachers were offered the personal affairs of their students
in order to assess their intellectual abilities,
their abilities, their relationship with peers, and some plans for the future.
The whole trick of the experiment was that there was one personal affair,
but it was pasted on by different photos of different children.
There were photos of beautiful children and ugly children.
It is interesting that as a result of this experiment,
all personal affairs with photos of beautiful children received the highest marks
and the highest promising prospects for development.
Photos with the personal affairs of children on which ugly children were pasted,
I quote, and ugly children received low marks
and low opportunities and prospects for development.
So, attractiveness is not only our individual personal impression,
but, as psychologists have proven, it also has a social nature.
And the third factor that is a companion of information distortion and perception
is the factor of attitude to us.
In fact, everything that indicates agreement and disagreement of a partner with us.
A lot of different experiments were also conducted here,
and, accordingly, a group of people perceived the lecturer.
If the opinion of the lecturer coincided with the group of participants,
the lecturer was perceived as successful, intellectual, his own, as a relative soul.
If the opinion of the lecturer did not coincide with the opinion of the group of participants,
it was strange and it was customary to underestimate the intellectual and personal characteristics of the lecturer.
He was not perceived as his own, and, accordingly,
the attitude to this lecturer in the group was completely different
than that whose opinion coincided with the group.
Thus, we have just considered three key factors that affect the primary perception,
that is, in the process of primary contact.
So, it is attractiveness, superiority and attitude to us.
However, when people enter into a longer, longer contact,
completely different perception factors act here,
such as identification, empathy and reflection.
Now we will consider the psychological mechanisms of perception and understanding in the process of constant communication.
These are three components — identification, empathy and reflection.
What is identification?
It is an assimilation of oneself to another person.
That is, in the process of interaction,
people are accustomed to putting themselves in the place of another person and predict,
how I would act in the place of this person if…
In the book by Dale Carnegie, How to Influence People,
the process of identification is described very well,
that is, the ability to put oneself in the place of another person,
how I would act in this situation.
The next point of perception is empathy.
Empathy is an understanding not at the level of thoughts,
how I would act, but at the level of feelings.
It is an attempt to emotionally respond to the problems of another person.
The founder of the humanistic psychology, Rogers,
once spoke about empathy,
that it is the ability to enter into the feelings of another person
and live them as another person lives them.
Well, the feeling of empathy is a very serious psychological load,
because if we live through the emotional state of all the people
we encounter in life,
there is a syndrome of burnout,
especially among those employees,
those categories of employees,
who are associated with communication with clients,
support services, call centers, operators,
those professions that are associated with constant interaction
with the problems of other people.
Therefore, the level of their empathy is very strictly controlled
at the level of skill training,
because if you go deep into the problem of each client,
accordingly, I repeat,
it is a very serious psychological load.
And people, as a rule, burn out very quickly during the year,
they have such a stress syndrome.
And the third point of perception and understanding is reflexion,
it is the awareness of the acting individual
of how he is perceived by the partner in communication.
That is, if at the level of empathy and identification
we are trying to understand the feelings of others or thoughts of others,
then at the level of reflexion we are not only trying to understand the feelings and thoughts of others,
but also to build a scheme of how another person perceives me after that.
That is, such a double reflection of actions of each other.
Actually, these three main psychological mechanisms
lie at the base of perception and understanding
when longer relationships are established.
What are the key issues of the psychological system?
Thus, today we have considered the key issues
related to the Personality and psychological systems.
Personality and psychological systems are a topic
that can be discussed for more than one, two, and even a whole week.
Therefore, we have taken the key points
that are very applicable and understandable in business.
So, we have considered the main theories of personality structure.
This is Freud's classical psychoanalysis,
Jung's analytical theory of personality structure,
and Bern's transactional analysis.
Next, we have learned about Myers-Briggs typology,
which is based on Carl Jung's theory,
and on the points that can be applied in practice,
at the moments of the typology of the personality of MBTI.
We have also learned about the window of Jahari
and such concepts as self-perception and feedback.
I wish you further success in your work.
I sincerely hope that the knowledge gained in today's course
will be useful not only in business, but also in personal life.
Thank you.